[Music]
spe
for
[Music]
foran Sharm is Sharm
for
[Music]
for e
I let them know it's on me
so before I start I would like to
request you all to sit upright and
gently close your eyes
[Music]
now you have closed your outer eyes but
you have to open your
[Music]
in and with the help of inner eyes
try to witness your sitting position
whether you are sitting upright or
not otherwise you may adjust yourself
now pay attention to your stomach
movements when you inhale it comes up
when you exhale it comes
now you may feel the expansion and
contraction at your CH area
[Music]
now Mark the position of your hands how
they are
resting
[Music]
for relax your both shoulders
relax your facial
muscles witness your both the lips how
they are joined together
[Music]
now witness the position of your tongue
how it is resting inside the teeth
now calm your
eyes upper part of your eyes like a do
they are gently
closed
for now Focus your whole attention on
your natural breathing
do not manipulate the breathing just
witness your natural breathing
when you inhale there's a pause
[Music]
inside when you exhale completely
there's a pause outside
try to witness this pause in and
[Music]
out for
now I will recite a small prayer you may
concentrate on the sound of this prayer
[Music]
later
Bud
[Music]
M
sh
[Music]
sh sh
she she
now take deep
down and while exhaling slowly open your
eyes
[Music]
in the beginning I would like to
thank and his wife
[Music]
because of these two
people
the I'm meeting with you
all so credit goes to both of
them if yog is a union
this Union takes place between you and
me so because of this two
people and they have assigned me a duty
today to talk before you about the works
which we have carried out in k
[Music]
so the scheme of presentation is that
there's a this presentation is divided
into two parts
in the first part it contains
introduction contribution of prominent
Personalities in the field of yoga
[Music]
little bit
of and his vision and Mission
[Music]
yoga research which we have carried out
it is divided into two
[Music]
parts scientific
research in scientific research there is
a thetical as well as experimental
research
[Music]
as and second is we is the
philosophical research Department
so coming directly to the introduction
part known to be risen from the vision
of ancient Rees
[Music]
who are said to be
dises those who have seen the Vic
mantras in their Vision they are said to
be
[Music]
though these people have developed that
kind of vision because of their own yoga
[Music]
practice so these people they are known
to be riches and moies
[Music]
and yoga as a science for comprehending
all domains of life spiritual as well as
[Music]
Once Upon a Time yoga in ancient days
yoga was pursued by handful Seekers
abiding in secluded places
[Music]
from but nowadays it has been
proved proved to be beneficial for
mankind
the benefits of yoga are Now supported
by scientific studies all over the
[Music]
world it is not only beneficial for
molding and shaping or cultivating the
human mind for Spiritual
[Applause]
[Music]
progress but also for the promotion of
health and healing
[Music]
yoga is also being accepted in academic
Cula of schools colleges universities
it is being accepted with a view to
enhance the learning
abilities or and thinking sorry orderly
in thinking
[Music]
yes and better job
performance and that is the reason why
nowadays in it sectors also people are
PR in
[Music]
yog so it sector is permitting to do to
do yoga with a VI to make their
professionals more productive
[Music]
now there were few Personalities in the
world I will quote here from India
[Music]
you might have heard the name of sh
sh who is properly known
as this is if you have read the yoga's
autobiography uh
that represents the tradition of sh
Larry
[Music]
and many and many
others have their OK making contribution
[Music]
uh in in propagating the yoga among the
masses around the
[Music]
globe the contribution of Swami in the
field of yog research
[Music]
in scientific and
philosophical is also well
known who founded this gam in
1924 uh
say the wrong number they will have me
out because with
number so actually he had conceived the
idea of establishing this institution in
1 however he could established this in
1924 at LUN
and this which has been engaged right
from its Inception in blending
successfully the techniques of classical
yoga and the scientific
findings this was I guess in his mind to
to be
integrating
for for the benefit of
man so he is Swami K who who has founded
this
in so he was
multi-dimensional
personality he was a great
[Music]
stist he has written so many poems in
Sanskrit as well as in marati he was a
[Music]
he had a oath in his mind that I will
never work under the British people
[Music]
he was a great
Patriot he was a great educationist and
[Music]
scientist if you go through his two BS
books pray three books yog therapy you
will be able to understand that he was a
great physiologist
it is only due to his scientific work
that the classical yoga become widely
excess accessible acceptable and
accessible in the field of and
[Music]
while arly observing the contribution of
Swami kand Swami Satan s the founder of
of
[Music]
the finds his opinion he has given his
opinion opinion
[Music]
so in theed comma I have mentioned the
quote of
Swami okay
speaks the founder
of who Insite and foresight LED K to an
internationally respected position Among
Us y institutions
[Music]
was indeed a unique combination
of was and his vision of growing and
pressing needs of humanity led to
his untiring efforts in propagating yoga
by a medium of scientific research
um
whatever the work he has carried out it
is published in the magazine known as
[Music]
yog the first magazine was was published
in
[Music]
1924 so he started working in 1917 in
hospital
and first study was carried out on and
[Music]
so people were astonished particularly
the scientists of the world they were
astonished when they found this first
experiment in the
[Music]
[Applause]
yog he was a great Visionary man
[Music]
who could visualize in
1917 and established his in his
mind and when he thought of establishing
calam its principle is to coordinate the
science and the spiritual spiritual
[Music]
I would like to quote his
ideal his ideal was to
quote coordination of Western laboratory
methods of research and spiritual
wonders of Eastern
thoughts wonders wonders of E
[Music]
so the coordination of this two may work
out some philosophy which will be
beneficial to the humanity which will be
beneficial to
[Music]
his personal
experiences in the field of yoga coupled
with the results of scientific
experiments convinced him once and all
that the ageold system of yoga can
greatly help Humanity Society to
Bringing Harmony amongst the people of
various cultures to meet the challenges
of modern
[Music]
era
for he has given a
message yoga has complete message for
[Music]
Humanity it has a message for human body
body it has a message for the human mind
[Music]
and it has also a message
for so his approach was synthetic in
nature he had understood the holistic
approach of
Indian
[Music]
Sciences because Indian thought does not
divide man in watertight
compartments it considers man as a whole
encompassing Body Mind and
Spirit
[Music]
for
friends I am working in this school for
the last 31
[Music]
years for whatever I have observed or
whatever I have
seen I would say that this institution
is nothing but it is the embodied vision
of Swami
[Music]
so we have yoga
research it
isil research and scientific research
[Music]
this
both both the departments were
simultaneously
deed uh okay so these are like separate
departments yes but
simultaneously depart is the
philosophical because is let
me because yog is embodied in Sanskrit
language which is not understandable to
the people
[Music]
so this philosophical lit research
Department
is engaged in understanding the two
import of various Concepts and practices
of yog
so he had a vision that experimental
study cannot be carried out unless we
understand what is there in the
scripture yeah
[Music]
so this department philosophical
research Department prepares the
hypothesis for the scientific studies
[Music]
and the scientific research Department
conducts the experimental as well as the
thetical studies the experimental as
well as the uh
thetical kind of survey survey
[Music]
so for scientific experimental studies
you need these
[Music]
subjects and subject can be the regular
regular practitioner of
you uh the regular practition of yoga
can be a subject can be taken into the
scientific research as a as a subject
because the iic studies in the field of
yoga cannot be carried out on frog and
cats and other things it needs human
being
[Music]
so in the beginning he was working on
his own
students scientific studies were carried
out on his own students thereafter he
established a college yoga training
program this then many types of courses
are being
run uh
[Music]
what's the name of of the it is sorry GS
College of yoga and cultural
sentences yes
actually this college was established to
get the subjects so the students were
regularly practicing yoga and these
students were used in the scientific
laboratory for as a subject
[Music]
um okay
so this is the first college in the
world which was established by
him so he was having two motives in his
mind while establishing
[Music]
this the first motive to get this
subject and the students of this college
will go to the different parts of the
globe and they will spread the message
of
[Music]
you now the name is yoga and cultural
cesis so yoga is a common platform for
all the cultures so the students they
develop that kind of respect towards
each and every cultures of the
world that
[Music]
now at this moment this college has
opted a three PR approach
we we are running some regular eight
regular
courses uh
one the promotion of yoga in schools it
is a government scheme wherein we are
training the various uh people of the
different schools this is the second one
second one
[Music]
and the third one is the orientation or
orientation program for the police
Personnel for the military people for
the police
personnels all
for as BSF has this is the working in
the Border areas these people are having
too much tensions so we are organizing
programs for such military people who
can release their stess
you again uh yeah for
[Music]
and for yog therapy we have in the
beginning Swami started rugan Mand now
it is converted into a health care
center uh sorry what kind of it is rug
means people were coming started coming
to Swami to overcome their personal
problems it started the hospital but now
it is turned into a big hospital and
healthare Center
[Music]
so in this
we have added the punch Karma of
AA as well as the
[Music]
naturop and naturopathy is being looked
after Mrs Sharma as head of the
department
now here you can
see that research training and treatment
so whatever whatever the results we are
getting out of research it is being
published now we'll discuss the some
theoretical and experimental studies
carried out few studies in front of you
because there's no much
[Music]
time so the first the theoretical
studies theoretical
of so one of the earliest works of some
importance in this field is of major
Basu who maintained that Yogi
contemplation was an effort to establish
a voluntary control over tic nervous
system
[Music]
many Studies have come forward which
have attempted to identify yogic and
tantric structures like Nar Padma and
like with anatomical
structures so this this is the reference
in the in the down you may see this work
is published in this
magazine for
[Music]
um in his yoga has suggested that the
three important
Nar
Anda mentioned in yoga literature may be
identified with the central canal and
the lateral column of the spinal cord
respect
[Music]
you
for let me let me elaborate this
aspect friends in the human body there
is a egg shaped bulous root we call it
kand there sorry there is an ex shaped
EG shaped shaped bous
Root bous Root Root from where all Nares
are
originated some of them they have
accepted that it is situated in the na
some of them they have accepted that it
is situated in the premium
part I have written one article and that
is published in yoga mimansa I have
taken 72 books of yoga and surveyed all
the books and I have worked on this
concept of K it is a
nucleus okay
[Music]
I would request you all to go through
that article I will let you know the
number with
[Music]
[Laughter]
this Gand is considered to be the origin
of all the naris and there are
72,000 naris in the
[Music]
yogat let
me some of the authors they say the
yogis they say it is like a roots of
banana
tree some of them they say it is like a
rubber ball a rubber ball rubber ball
some of they some of them they say it is
like a egg shaped egg shaped root
so this all the this three Nisa
and pinga and sura because it is in
between so these are considered to be
very very
[Music]
important NIS are said to be the subtle
energy
channels Nar from the Sans rout n
it is a hole kind of through which the
energy is
passing this is called
n through which the pic
moves that is called that now let us
take one
example suppose you are sitting in front
of the TV and you are using this uh
[Music]
remote when you press the button of the
remote
the TV accordingly listens changes
the now from this hand to the
TV in the space there's a path
[Music]
but this path is not
visible it is recognized only by the
TV so the Nar can be
experienced only by the
practitioners and not the by the people
who are just talking above the
globes in this article I have
established that
unless we understand the yogic anatomy
physiology of it we will not be able to
understand this Yogi Anatomy physiology
with the help help of modern physiology
and modern
Anatomy so uh first we have to
understand the ccle anatomy before we
come to the cross through the through
the anatomy and physiology of modern
science we will not be able to
understand the yogic anatomy and yogic
physiology that is what I wanted to say
and padama is that when this this subtle
energy channels when they
crisscross it is called Energy Center we
call it
[Music]
chakras
for so after this mention of
vianda uh M Dr VN SE as well as so many
people have worked on this and Sh
Chandra Basu R Prasad sh may also be
mentioned in this Con so many people
have worked on this
[Music]
line an important work in this Regard in
this kind of approach to yoga is the
mysterious by
B have you heard the name of
B so following major Basu he sees
significance of Yoga practices in
relation to the autonomic nerv
[Music]
system he he was of the opinion he was
of the opinion that the objective for
which Yogi practices seem to be adapted
is the stimulation of bigest ner
that was the most important mean the
purpose is to stimulate the biggest
nerves that was the main motive of doing
such type of research
[Music]
so o to the slight difference between
the anatomical relations of the left and
right V he consider that the right one
is to be the greater important and
actually sought to identify it with the
[Music]
this study was published in
1927 some of the experimental studies
whatever active scientific interest
supported by experimental work in yoga
is seen today may be said to have
started with the foundation of
gami wherever the work is going on
whether it in America whether it is in
anywhere in the world it is only because
the initial
[Music]
so the works ofi kupy a very important
and unique position among all the
scientific works of on yoga done so far
in the country and as
the work which was done under his
supervision are reported in Yi Masa and
these are the volumes I have mentioned
I'm going to give the copy of this
presentation to Mr chongi
G and you may get the copy from him
[Music]
so the first experimental work
demonstrated was the development of
negative pressure in the colon during
the practice of NOA
and he gave the name of this negative
pressure mad vacum madas is the master
of
[Music]
his master madas who was staying in
Gujarat near
malsa up to that point the possibility
of creating such pressure changes in the
inter internal cavity by voluntary
manipulation was not known nor
investigated in the field of visy people
were not knowing anything about for this
[Music]
practice studies on the position of
colon and distribution of colon contents
during the practice of Udan and Nai
threw much light on the physiological
changes that are brought about by these
two practices and also explain the
principle of water
[Music]
suction for
before this experiment some people they
were knowing this Kaa and they were
doing this suction of the oil and when
they were producing they were claiming
that they can lit the lamp with their
urine so this myth was totally futile
reputed by for
so it was reputed the first man in the
world who could repute this this is
wrong they were claiming that they are
having Supernatural power
[Music]
now the other experimental study where
in the CO2 consumption and O consumption
oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide
output in prayic breathing with
different time units of inhalation
retention and exhalation were studied
properly and compared with that of Norm
in prayic breathing it has been
established now that there's no what you
call the uh CO2 this you you develop a
kind of tolerance to that
CO2 it is not oxygen value it is
CO2 uh tolerant value this is what is
established
people previously mistaking that see you
are if you are practicing pray you will
get more more oxygen more oxygen no it
is you develop a tolerance to the carbon
dioxide this is more
important
for after this experiment many many
medical fatties started coming to Swami
G and for the there were more queries
you with their
queries so this was also a great uh
achievement
the studies
on air composition in normal breathing
and so JBS hard in relation to
respiratory physiology were challenged
on the basis of this work the presence
of this air Platinum proposed by head
was disproved this was a great
achievement this was a great
achievement for
[Music]
so this becomes very helpful to
understand the Crux of prayic
physiology yeah that
[Music]
what is CS off it is the
Ence okay so there are so many effect of
Vu on gastic acidity this was also
effect of D on gastic activity
[Music]
and the pressure changes from Esopus
stomach colon bladder in various y
practices this is also one of the most
important breathing
[Music]
when we are practicing the ASAS or some
at that point of time this kind of
pressure changes can be felt by the
practitioner
[Music]
so effect of some physiological
variables also
[Music]
so there are many many many studies now
we have made a kind of what you call
this CD are you having the CD so we have
made CD it is searchable CD
Now
College college so
yog yeah he knows he will let you know
there are so many studies in this regard
energy expenditure in deep meditative
State and this is study in relation to
the concept OFA and pingla with a view
to tackle the right brain or left brain
so many studies are being carried out in
this regard
[Music]
now Electro myographic studies on as
this is also carried out as elect
comparison of meditation and
hypnotic this comparison study was also
carried out
so radi radiological studies were also
carried
[Music]
out position of colon distribution of
colon content as influenced by the and
that was studied position of diaphragm
and ribs has influenced by certain y
[Music]
let us have a look because it is 90
years old now completing Century so so
many work we have carried out it is not
easy to display before you within one or
two hours
[Music]
so you can see the recording of pressure
changes during M the
middle more prominent
can more prominent more
is it
okay okay
and here you can here you can see
recording the pressure of
[Music]
during here you can see that this is
this is and this one
is yeah this experiment was published in
volume number one to this this
now here you can see the milk is being
sucked into stomach
during due to negative pressure person
is not dinking it is automatically goes
in because of the negative pressure
[Music]
and here the negative pressure inside
the stomach is being recorded on the
chog
[Music]
as electroic studies
on you can see a is the EMG changes when
ASA is done with a lot of efforts and
tense muscles what happens to you this
is this is what is the if you practice
ASAS like exercise what happens to you
that is what is uh carried out here in
this
[Music]
and when you practice keeping the
principles of pan yoga in mind then the
you can see the change
this is being practiced like a exercise
[Music]
in this is this is also like
this and this practice in the relaxed
condition as per PS 47
[Music]
means your heart rate increases
32% if you do it like exercise physical
exercise
so whenever we are practicing ASA we
have to be careful we have to opt the
whatever is said
by effort should be there and merging
with the practice this two uh principles
should be followed by practicing ASAS
[Music]
if you if you reduce this reduce this
exercise type of practice it reduces the
133% but if you keep it if you practice
it like a yoga like it as the principle
of yoga only 6% increase what was the
difference between one and
two because here too much pressure is
applied and second in the second one it
is pressure is being applied but not to
that extent
here samadi we have a pit have you seen
in our physiology Department the pit
people were claiming previously they
were tall claim that we can reside under
the Earth for days together months
together
[Music]
so that this subject is going the trial
this was the only person who can stay 18
hours in the
P before this
experiment some of the people separan
people they were fooling the society
that we can stay under the but there is
a second door they me and they were
going out through the that door
you so this
experiment totally futi this this myth
you
know
for and this is the yogi we call call
him I was I was I was fortunate
that uh I have spent lot of time with
this
person and ultimately he was died in my
lab
he was having the ability that he was a
very good practitioner of prayam as well
as he was performing the K
mudra and because Swami
G uh instructed him not to cut the fum
but he was cutting slowly slowly slowly
slowly and then he was he was able to
perform this k k but thereafter he was
unable to only be people were
understanding what he's talking you
people cannot understand because there
was no control on that
time yeah but he himself did this
without Swami K was not knowing this
every day cutting and applying the PO
you know
[Music]
foreign
but this man was having that power the
elephant cannot break that chain and he
was able to break the chain and he did
in in the International Conference in
front of
demr was Wonder
[Music]
so the another study on leadi it was
compared with the other this leadi the
recording of EEG and ECG during Le and 8
channel po it was done
[Music]
so another study one of the doctor came
to just kind of story
okay
for and he was not convinced that
emotion can uh heart the person you know
he was
not very SCI it was very scient
and just just you see the see the normal
state of his
[Music]
stomach
but he was abused and he was
irritated and see the result of that it
is only that
[Music]
the position of his stomach that can be
seen then he was he was has said that
see we have to experiment and with a
view to convince you we irritated you
and then we gave him a
relaxation
for and after relaxation and meditation
for 5 minutes the position was changed
[Music]
so it was established and he was totally
convinced that emotion they disturb our
metabolism so when you become
angry not only your breathing become
fast
[Music]
but the whole metabolism is
changed therefore I request you all
don't get angry
pleas so some of the uh what call the
yoga and physical education this studies
were carried out at kadam there are so
many I will just quote few of them yoga
and physical
fitness okay okay so just we'll finish
it this part will be finished and then
we'll take rest for few minutes okay
this
is before before yoga training the 40%
of the school children were la
in minimum muscular
fitness okay that study was carried out
and we found it very useful and it was
started in the scho
[Music]
you can also add the abdominal strength
and flexibility it was very
poor but after the practice you
know only three three weeks yoga program
three weeks yoga program increases like
[Music]
anything it was
also it was also done on police
personnels police people they were
lacking now now some of the studies were
done on the treatment
diabetes and the the dose insulin dose
was was
decreased the diabetic with develop the
tolerance to the glucose
suppose they were taking two times this
Inson it was reduced to one
time many many studies are carried
[Music]
out this are the Mantra Ching on psychop
physiology iCal
parameters effect ofar effect of gri
Mantra that is what we have carried out
in
[Music]
K psychological cing through
us just to make just to make you
understand that with the help of thisa
practice whatever the impressed and
suppressed thought in the childhood they
come to the surface and you can wash out
such type of repr suppressed thought
with the help of this Thea practice
[Music]
around 100 experiments were done on this
box and we could get a fantastic
results please keep in mind that the
studies reviewed here certainly do not
exist the list of scientific words on
yoga however whatever is are reviewed
seems sufficient to draw some conclusion
about the general tense of scientific
resarch in in country
thank you very much we'll uh present
before you the phos the work after the
break 10 minutes